---
title: "Machine learning and natural language process-ing for geolocation-centric monitoring and characterization of opioid-related Twitter chatter"
collection: publications
excerpt: 'Our objective is to develop and validate an automatic text-processing pipeline for geospatial and temporal analysis of opioid-mentioning social media chatter'
date: 2019-11-06
venue: 'JAMA Network Open'
citation: 'Sarker A, Gonzalez-Hernandez G, Ruan Y, Perrone J. (2019). &quot;Machine learning and natural language process-ing for geolocation-centric monitoring and characterization of opioid-related Twitter chatter.&quot; <i>JAMA Network Open</i>. 2(11).'
---
# Abstract

**Importance** Automatic curation of consumer-generated, opioid-related social media big data may enable real-time monitoring of the opioid epidemic in the United States.

**Objective** To develop and validate an automatic text-processing pipeline for geospatial and temporal analysis of opioid-mentioning social media chatter.

**Design, Setting, and Participants** This cross-sectional, population-based study was conducted from December 1, 2017, to August 31, 2019, and used more than 3 years of publicly available social media posts on Twitter, dated from January 1, 2012, to October 31, 2015, that were geolocated in Pennsylvania. Opioid-mentioning tweets were extracted using prescription and illicit opioid names, including street names and misspellings. Social media posts (tweets) (n = 9006) were manually categorized into 4 classes, and training and evaluation of several machine learning algorithms were performed. Temporal and geospatial patterns were analyzed with the best-performing classifier on unlabeled data.

**Main Outcomes and Measures** Pearson and Spearman correlations of county- and substate-level abuse-indicating tweet rates with opioid overdose death rates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention WONDER database and with 4 metrics from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health for 3 years were calculated. Classifier performances were measured through microaveraged F1 scores (harmonic mean of precision and recall) or accuracies and 95% CIs.

**Results** A total of 9006 social media posts were annotated, of which 1748 (19.4%) were related to abuse, 2001 (22.2%) were related to information, 4830 (53.6%) were unrelated, and 427 (4.7%) were not in the English language. Yearly rates of abuse-indicating social media post showed statistically significant correlation with county-level opioid-related overdose death rates (n = 75) for 3 years (Pearson *r* = 0.451, *P* < .001; Spearman *r* = 0.331, *P* = .004). Abuse-indicating tweet rates showed consistent correlations with 4 NSDUH metrics (n = 13) associated with nonmedical prescription opioid use (Pearson *r* = 0.683, *P* = .01; Spearman *r* = 0.346, *P* = .25), illicit drug use (Pearson *r* = 0.850, *P* < .001; Spearman *r* = 0.341, *P* = .25), illicit drug dependence (Pearson *r* = 0.937, *P* < .001; Spearman *r* = 0.495, *P* = .09), and illicit drug dependence or abuse (Pearson *r* = 0.935, *P* < .001; Spearman *r* = 0.401, *P* = .17) over the same 3-year period, although the tests lacked power to demonstrate statistical significance. A classification approach involving an ensemble of classifiers produced the best performance in accuracy or microaveraged F1 score (0.726; 95% CI, 0.708-0.743).

**Conclusions and Relevance** The correlations obtained in this study suggest that a social media–based approach reliant on supervised machine learning may be suitable for geolocation-centric monitoring of the US opioid epidemic in near real time.



[**[Paper]**](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.14672)

